---
title: Designing Open Democracy
permalink: /Designing_Open_Democracy/
contributors:
  - Charlie
---

## About Designing Open Democracy

[Designing Open Democracy](https://www.designingopendemocracy.com) is an
Australian operated forum of process engineers, social architects and
philosophers aiming to explore the ways that technology, engineering and
design of social systems can be applied to every levels of society.

We are nonpartisan and also agnostic to any particular democratic
innovative approach, aiming to help foster tighter consensus and
collaboration between all political parties and organisation towards a
stronger and healthier democracy.

Designing Open Democracy will not presume any form of democratic system
to be superior, but is a forum for discussion and practical planning on
how such system may be implemented. In addition, this meetup will not be
exclusive to any political party, but be a forum for members of various
parties, groups and individuals to come together to trade ideas related
to open democracy and evaluate their strengths and weaknesses.

### Podcast

In our podcast you will find detailed discussions in potential
opportunities for reforming of existing democratic institutions; from
local organisations to national governments around the world through
technology or other practices. Our aim is to improve democracy: we think
this can best be done by providing a forum for discussing democracy
proposals, ideas, and to foster collaboration between people who would
like to participate in democracy reform.

You can subscribe to the podcast in your podcast app of choice, or on
[Anchor.fm](https://anchor.fm/designingopendemocracy),
[Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/show/4aOBVMKFEfgf03P6mNNZdw) or
[Apple
Podcasts](https://podcasts.apple.com/au/podcast/designing-open-democracy/id1492656241).

### Join the Discussion

#### Meetup

Check out our [Meetup page](https://www.designingopendemocracy.com) for
events taking place online and in person in Melbourne, Australia.

#### Forum

We have an [online discussion
board](https://discuss.designingopendemocracy.com) to talk about
democracy, ideas, events, and our latest podcast episodes.

#### Telegram

If you have the messaging app Telegram you can join our instant
messaging chatroom. Click
[here](https://t.me/joinchat/HNk_UBX8A7jBPJPbAZU5Zg) for an invite to
our Telegram channel.

#### Email

If you have any questions directly related to us that cannot be answered
in our online discussion forum or you would like to give us a tip or a
request for an interview on our podcast then you can reach us at:
contact\[at\]designingopendemocracy.com
