---
title: Employee Stock Ownership Plans
permalink: /Employee_Stock_Ownership_Plans/
contributors:
  - Aya.elfadil
---

The *employee stock ownership plan* is the most frequently used
structure for broad-based employee ownership in the United States
(ESOP). Around 6,500 companies in the United States have an ESOP, and
approximately 14 million workers in the United States participate in an
ESOP. ESOP is a type of retirement plan that invests primarily in
company stock and places its assets in a trust for employees. It may own
100 percent or a small percentage of a company's stock. Participants in
an ESOP (employees) accumulate shares over time and are compensated by
having their shares purchased back, typically after they leave the
company.

Employee ownership plans are most frequently used as a vehicle for
business transition in closely held businesses. Congress has provided
significant tax benefits in support of this strategy. Employee ownership
is also frequently used to help attract and retain employees, build
long-term wealth, and foster a high-engagement work culture in which
employees are encouraged to think and act like owners.

ESOPs are frequently formed during the process of selling a business, as
they can purchase the shares of a departing owner in pre-tax dollars at
extremely favorable terms for the owner, the employees, and the business
itself. Selling owners can contribute any portion of their stock to the
ESOP and defer tax on the gain if certain conditions are met. Congress
established incentives for ESOPs to borrow money (leveraged ESOPs),
enabling them to purchase more shares than they could otherwise. ESOP
transactions that are not leveraged are typically smaller and have lower
transaction costs. Additionally, businesses can use ESOPs to reward and
engage employees even if there is no selling owner.
